---
layout: research2016-template
title: Introduction
category: research2016

---

In 2016 there were more than 81 annual veg food festivals in North America. These events vary significantly in size, with some smaller ones attracting a crowd of around 500 people, and the larger ones bringing out tens of thousands of attendees. In total, these festivals attract well over 300,000 attendees annually. In addition to the people who come out to these events, millions more encounter their posters, flyers, posts on social media, online advertisements, TV news stories, newspaper articles and so on. These grassroots events are becoming one of the primary ways that the general public encounters vegetarianism and veganism. Because of their communication abilities and high attendance, VegFests are quickly becoming the most recognizable public face of veganism. These festivals have spread organically over the past decade, without any central organization or formal coordination. Most are run entirely by volunteers, with a small number of them utilizing limited paid staff. Despite their novel approach and dispersed organization, these events have become a significant part of the modern animal rights movement.

By conducting in-depth interviews and surveys with organizers, we have created a picture of VegFest organizing in 2016. The researchers traveled to a handful of festivals across the country, sat in on organizing meetings, recorded over a hundred hours of interviews, and conducted post-event surveys of attendees and exhibitors at 5 festivals.

This report will provide the reader with a thorough understanding of the context and meaning of VegFests by introducing them to the organizers who participated in the project. Through the accompanying analysis and recommendations, the researchers have articulated recommendations and practical steps going forward for all those who are invested in the success of these important events, whether organizers, activists or supporters.

## A Note on Embracing Our Subjectivity

This research is not impartial. In fact, the researchers are personally invested in the findings of this report. This project is a sort of participatory action research, where both researchers are actively involved in the subject area that is being studied. In this case, both Morgan and Drew are long-time vegans and activists, and Drew is himself an active organizer of the New England VegFest. We mention this in the spirit of transparency from a researcher perspective, and to briefly discus bias in this type of inquiry.

The overall goal of VegFests is to facilitate the adoption of a vegan lifestyle by reaching a large number of people. As animal activists, the researchers share this goal. One might argue that this research project could benefit from an analysis done by someone invested in the success of these events, as they are extra motivated to find answers. However, we would like to point out that the researchers, like everyone else, have biases based on past experiences, current political persuasions, and personal social statuses, and that this may affect our conclusions.  

Sometimes this report may resemble engineering rather than social science. We are not simply looking to understand a complicated system from an objective vantage point, we are trying to find the knobs and the levers that we can play with to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of organizing in our movement. While we all envision a more ethical world, just how we are to get there is often a contentious issue. It is for this reason that the researchers have focused this work on the interview data, and have made attempts to favor the practical over the philosophical.

The results and conclusions represented in the report belong to the researchers from their subjective position. As such, we invite the reader to read this report with a critical mind. We respect critiques of this work, and feel that the movement benefits from self reflection done in good faith for a common goal.
