---
layout: research2016-template
title: Research Goals
category: research2016

---

The key question explored in this research is: What factors in event organizing lead to success or failure of a vegan food festival? We pose this intentionally broad question to better understand how VegFests are envisioned and executed, and what can we practically glean from core organizer experiences.

The goal of this research is to look at a number of veg food festivals in North America as case ­studies in order to determine what factors may have lead to their success or failure. Our intended outcome is to generate practical knowledge for organizers as well as to offer recommendations to VegFund on how they can most effectively support veg food festival organizing. When writing this report, we envisioned the reader to be active VegFest organizers who wish to learn from their peers and improve their own organizing, funders who support VegFests and who want to learn how to most effectively support organizers, or other activists hoping to learn more about VegFest organizing and how it relates to the whole movement. The language and terminology in this report reflects the researcher’s assumption that the reader is familiar with the general issues and ideas surrounding veganism and the animal advocacy movement.

We intend to reach our research goals by circulating this report’s findings to VegFund and to organizers, by making concrete recommendations for future work, and by being a resource for organizers. In short, we want to lay the groundwork for productive discourse on organization as well for designing exemplary funding plans.

## The Value of VegFests

### Movement Building

VegFests are often organized and run by many people who would not otherwise be involved in the animal rights movement. A typical VegFest is organized by 2-8 organizers and 20-50 volunteers. Many larger VegFests often have a small number of core organizers who are strongly connected to the animal rights movement, but the people performing much of the other tasks are not involved in an animal rights movement outside of the event. A common criticism of VegFests is that they use up a lot of resources that could be applied to other kinds of animal advocacy work. We respond to this criticism by arguing that VegFests generate engagement, and thus resources that benefit a larger movement. We do not envision animal activism as a movement with limited resources, rather one that resonates with many people for many different reasons, and that finding and promoting places of solidarity where the energy for change is to be found. VegFests do not use resources, rather they are an institution that grows the capacity of the vegan movement by making engagement accessible in novel ways.

As an example, we learned that VegFest volunteers are not usually current activists that are choosing to volunteer for a VegFest, rather than taking another activist action, such as leafleting or protesting. Volunteers for VegFests are generally people whose primary and often first involvement in the movement is through a VegFest. We mention this to underscore the value of VegFests as a gateway for future involvement in animal issues, and as a remedy for past issues of accessibility and low participation within the movement.

### Normalizing Veganism

Vegans make up a very small percentage of the population. Vegan Resource Group estimates that there are about 3.7 million vegans in the US, or about 1.6% of the population. Objectively speaking veganism is not “normal”—it does not represent the norms of American life. Culturally speaking, veganism is becoming more normalized. There are growing number of vegan companies emerging each year to accommodate a growing interest in ethical lifestyles,   from specialty food producers to travel agents and beyond. VegFest provide an opportunity to present veganism as mainstream and accessible, rather than the burden is has been portrayed as in the past.

### Organizing towards collective action

VegFests are quickly becoming the public face of the vegan and animal rights movement. When conceiving of this research project, we wondered why, despite their size, do VegFests not appear to receive a proportional amount of attention or funding from the movement? For example, at the 2016 Animal Rights conference there were 80 workshops and only one session relevant to VegFest organizing. We believe that part of activism is seizing the moment, which is why a major inspiration for this project is to encourage the movement to make use of an opportunity for outreach on a scale that was unheard of just a decade earlier.

There is a big gap in the animal advocacy movement. For most of the history of the modern animal rights movement, it has been a protest movement. VegFests represent a different strategy. The animal rights movement has often been a movement that negates unethical cultural norms. Activists work to get fur banned from a store, they speak out against the abuse of animals in circuses, we hold marches and rallies calling for an end to animal testing, we ask people to stop eating meat, dairy & eggs. Each of these actions are critical responses to cultural norms, framing actions as negative.  The discourse of “end”, “stop”, “don’t” carry a negative connotation that can come across as authoritarian or preachy.  Even in outreach efforts,  the animal movement engages in the discourse of counter-education, saying, ”don’t eat meat” or “factory farming is bad for animal, bad for your health, bad for the environment” or “reduce the amount of meat you eat”, reprimanding the reader for what is considered “normal” behaviour.

“Outreach” in the animal movement often means giving out information to ideally convince someone that they should not do a certain thing or that they should be against something. For example, Vegan Outreach gives out millions of booklets that are intended to education people about factory farming and encourage them to make the choice to not eat meat. Education is an essential part of social change, but information about an injustice is not sufficient to create change either on a societal level or on a personal levels. Of course, some people do indeed make significant changes as a result of “negative” outreach materials, but for those who do not respond to this tactic alone, the movement should diversify and make efforts to reach out in new ways.

Whether someone has access to vegetarian foods—or whether or not they realize that they have access to vegetarian foods—is a large factor in whether or not someone becomes vegan. The value of VegFests is that they introduce positive discourse, and affirming interactions that frame veganism as a choice rather than a restriction. Using the power of VegFests to reach out to people in ways that personally appeal to them is in the best collective interest of the movement. VegFests are worthy of increased movement support and consideration, as they too complement and ameliorate other forms of outreach.
