---
layout: research2016-template
title: Measuring Success
category: research2016

---

How do researchers choose the best approach to measure things like "success"?  We chose to measure it by using an approach that is both explorative, descriptive and explanatory. We asked *exploratory* questions like: What is a veg food fest? When did they start? What is the goal? *Descriptive* questions: Who is involved in organizing veg fests? Where are they held? How are they organized? What is their strategy? What are their challenges? *Explanatory* knowledge will inform the reader: What makes a veg fest a success or a failure? What is common among successful or failing events in terms of organization, structure resources and communications?

The reasoning behind choosing this approach through in-depth interviews was not to gather data that will be representative of every VegFest, rather to learn from individual organizers, in different locations, with a wide range of experience in organizing these events. Rather, we spoke with diverse organizers in order to understand the nuances and variables in organizing, to better support these events more effectively. Measuring success in a quantitative fashion is not a goal of this report. We argue that we are more interested in understanding and observing success, as this is an equally practical approach from the perspective of those in a social movement. We asked our interview participants about success, what it means to them, and what they see as an indication of it. When analyzing the interview data and secondary data sources, we were then able to identify the many facets of "success" and produce a rich analysis of what it means to organizers. What we found is that success is not reducible to attendance or financial health (though these are important factors), a key point that would be difficult to support in the absence of these long conversations with organizers.

In the later section, Analysis, we discuss specific elements that lead to a successful event. These findings should be given special attention, as they are the most practical for organizers and supporters alike. We are proud to offer our audience enhanced knowledge about VegFest organizing, and to open up conversations, create networks, and connect organizers with needed resources for future endeavors. We are interested in making the most out of an existing event model, with suggestions that are aimed at the organization level.

We wish that there was existing compatible research on the attendee level, that addressed impact, diet and lifestyle changes, and the general effectiveness of this model of vegan outreach, that we could incorporate into this report. This research is of course, beyond the scope of this project, however a longitudinal cohort study with VegFest attendees would be a highly recommended future research avenue. We see this as one of the limitations of this project: that one major indicator of success is based on attendees, and the resources and training to conduct research on this population is not only lacking, but significant energy is expended on informal surveys during the event, that produce data which is subject to several validity issues.

## Introduction to Analysis

The following research findings are sourced from an analysis of nine interviews with VegFest organizers. The interview transcripts are available in the appendix, with references to questions found in the interview guide. Direct citations from these transcripts are the structure of our analysis. We chose to often quote our interview participants at length to preserve the context of their insights, as they shared their opinions and experiences with VegFest organizing. Below we will discuss in-depth what organizers shared about the skills needed to make the event a success, their communications and outreach strategies,their internal organization, and financial concerns, and their overall approach and philosophy that inspires them to take this approach to vegan outreach and animal activism.

The names and any identifying information about the interview participants has been changed to protect their privacy.

## Skills and expertise

Adequately skilled organizers and volunteers can plan any large-scale event, VegFests are no exception. Good VegFests are planned by good organizers. It is helpful to think of VegFests as "themed public occasions designed to occur for a limited duration that celebrate valued aspects of a community’s way of life", as suggested by Norman Douglas (2001), when writing about community events. With this in mind, the ‘theme’ and the ‘valued aspects of the communities way of life’ are precisely the factors that make VegFests distinct, and are what complicates the usual skills and expertise involved in successful organizing.

What is the theme of a VegFest? This question is addressed in depth in the section on "philosophy" below, but merits a brief mention here. The theme is distinct from a VegFest's goals or overarching ideology. Instead, a theme is more closely related to the tone and tangible structure of the event. In the case of VegFests, we found the theme to be variably a food festival, a convention, or an edu-tainment event, with an emphasis on fun and inclusion.

Following this, the "valued aspects of the communities way of life" are broad across the vegan/animal-advocacy community, but generally include food, ethical and environmental concerns, social change, and personal health. The skills and expertise that contribute to successful VegFests, therefore, are those that best help "celebrate" their values. "Celebration" is key to the nature of VegFests, and is what makes them the most popular animal advocacy event in North America. Organizers celebrate by working to reach as wide an audience as possible, by ensuring the event is positive and festive, and by affirming the values of the movement to current and future participants. To this end, the skills and expertise that come together to make the event a success are complimentarily practical, personal and cultural.

We examined each interview for mentions of sought-after skills that are or would be an asset to organizers. They included the following:

* Web design skills
* Graphic design skills
* Photography skills
* Video editing skills
* Clerical/bureaucratic, or “paperwork” skills
* Formal event planning specialization
* Fundraising and sponsor recruitment
* Media spokespeople or public relations specialization
* Community outreach and networking skills

VegFest organizers largely apply their own specialized skills to the event, or they call in resources from within their networks as needed. It is notable that when asked, the interview participants did not see any deficit in the above skills as a problem that could be fixed with more funds to hire a professional, rather, they wanted organizers who share their mission to be skilled in this area. This sentiment suggests that although the above skills are desired, there is an *added value* to those who possess these talents and who are part of a vegan/animal advocacy in-group.

>“Web designers are one of those holy grails of the nonprofit world. Web designers, and graphic designers and lawyers, everyone needs a couple of them.” (Darcy Q9.1.1)

>“I mean we could hire somebody to be a festival planner.  And, I had said that I would probably spend time on specific aspects of, like, sponsor recruitment, and volunteer recruitment, and such...then I maybe I would hire somebody to do more of the kind of logistical stuff, and committee coordination, that kind of thing. that would cost a lot of money to **get a competent person that we trust**, and I would love to hire something like that.” (Val Q11.3) (emphasis ours)*

For example, a graphic designer is tasked with creating outreach materials for the event. We would expect a graphic designer from within the animal advocacy/vegan movement to understand the importance of specific value-based decisions, such as choosing appropriate imagery, or printing on recycled paper with vegetable-based inks. *Val* shared a charming anecdote which underscores how skills and in-group status reciprocally add value to each other, where skills alone might make your product tone-deaf, a purely activist approach may be confusing and insular:  

>“It's a free event, fun free event with food, and those kind of things are things that we think will appeal to a lot of people, whatever their dietary habits are. We try to be conscious of that. We have realized that we're not great at this, because we're too much of an insider crew and the most obvious example for us is our very frustrating logo. We have a logo that's a cow and we've had numerous questions. I think I've personally been asked dozens of times why there's a cow on a VegFest logo. Because when they see that, they think of like a BBQ or something, as far as I can tell. But all of our volunteers, and even new volunteers, if I show it to them, they understand why there's a cow, like “oh it's a cute cow that you wouldn't want to harm.”  That's what they see. But part of our target audience is confused by it, and they think it's really weird so we want to change our logo.“ (Val, Q10.3)

To linger on our example, a graphic designer based in the movement would be sensitive to the audience and the tone of the communications with respect to the principles that underlie the event. This added value is crucial when many VegFests are careful to de-emphasize the ‘activist’ dimension of the event, even going so far as to explicitly not mention the word “vegan” in their promotional materials. As *Kriska* recounts, there is a certain finesse in communicating values, as well as the theme.

>“We do have the word “compassion” in there, but we don’t... when there's any writing, we don't say “stop the suffering of animals and come to the VegFest”, we're much more subtle about it, and saying “come and eat healthy delicious food”, and it’s “earth friendly”, and all that kind of thing, and then maybe we’ll throw in a word in like “ethical” or “compassion”, but we don't even mention the animals in the top-level advertising.” (Kriska, Q4.5)

Another interviewee, *Shay*, said:

>“It was [previous name] because it was supposed to be this more broad name, more people won't really know it was a vegetarian vegan festival. It was that way up until last year, so this is the first year it's become VegFest. That was interesting, the thought process of... I still think we're not sure if that was the right choice or not... Is the VegFest name good because it makes everybody know that it's veg-related? Or is it actually a negative because people now, people know it's veg-related and may not come? I think that's a thing that maybe your research can help us figure out.” (Shay Q1.2)

Furthermore, there is a latent effect on movement-building when skilled collaborators are recruited from within the community. This benefits the individual by affirming their own value within the community, and by reinforcing their beliefs, while establishing reciprocal and meaningful connections between like-minded others. On a broader scale, skilled individuals and their expertise can contribute to a collective repository of resources that can be shared among organizers worldwide, strengthening overall impact.

*Shay* touched on this topic of building up skills in activists:

>“I think the better formula would be training people as activists, animal rights activists in general, and them learning a ton of valuable skills like Web design, graphic design, photography and video editing. If you had an activist that could do a wide range of things then they can take that skill and help a bunch of different organizations.” (Shay, pre-interview conversation)

>“I would encourage them to think about the time commitment that they have to offer,  who they can get to help them and what skills those people have and think about what skills are lacking, if the people that they're thinking about organizing with have skills in graphic design or layout of website... they just think about that and brainstorm what you will do about it. And project management, you know, it's important to have somebody that's good at that also.” (Briar, Q11.1)

Sufficiently skilled organizers and volunteers can plan any large-scale event, but skilled VegFest organizers with a cultural literacy of the movement excel at celebrating the community, ensuring the themed event is the best representation of the vegan "way of life".

VegFests are unique in that familiarity with the vegan "way of life" is in itself a type of expertise, also referred to as cultural literacy. Simply being an established member of a vegan or animal advocacy community has a stand-alone value as an organizer. Due to the theme of the event, having a network and community in place that can be accessed to solicit event participants, call in resources, find a target audience, and handle the labor demands of the event itself, greatly eases the workload of new organizers.  

Many organizers mentioned that “knowing the amount of work involved” was something they would have liked to have known before taking on an organizing role. This load is less daunting when the organizer is not tasked with learning facets of organizing for the first time, whether it is discovering funding sources or navigating local bylaws. The learning curve for novice organizers can feel steep, which is why some interview participants offer encouragement and this sound advice: start slow, and make sure your core organizing group is solid, dependable and dedicated.

>“I would suggest starting to do some of the things that we've done as standalone things.  Like, it's really not that hard to organize at a natural food store, or a community center, a cooking demo or hosting a speaker, or to find a place where you can do food giveaways. Just some of the elements I think you can do without doing a full festival. If you're starting from scratch, those elements will develop really everything that you need to be able to do a festival in the future. You'll develop a volunteer base, committee members relationships with people in restaurants, in the community and, potential instructors, and you'll learn your organizing skills yourself. So I would suggest starting with some of those things as a first place to start... we got the best committee that we've ever worked with on anything, when we started planning a festival. So if you're going down that route then well... I think that the key thing that, I mean what what makes or breaks it, I mean what you really need is to recruit a great committee. And I'm not sure exactly where you start, but that's something that I would be concerned about really early on. If I were a volunteer, or even a staff person at some organization... find a handful, if not several people, who you think are ready reliable and very competent and in line with your mission and and then go from there.” (Val, Q11.1)

>“It really is important to have that group of ten or fifteen people who have organized large scale events before and know the nonprofit world in their area. Start with that. Have as strong coalitions as you can... When you start doing larger volunteer meetings out there remember, start with a coalition of organizations, and talk to main organizations and then at your early volunteer meetings reach out to their members. And then reach out to the community at large. Just in that order. Just so you have, like, a core of people who have experience doing organizing before. I guess that does seem somewhat exclusionary but I think when you're starting a new event that is this big if you don't have a lot of experience doing it, bringing in a bunch of other inexperienced people is not going to make anything be easier in the short term.” (Darcy, Q4.2)

As mentioned above, organizers who possess certain skills and experience are certainly an asset to a VegFest. Beyond this, organizers who are competent and dependable on a personal level can really drive a VegFest. Interpersonal relationships are important for healthy group dynamics. VegFests are generally not-for-profit and rarely have any paid staff, so it is all the more important to have strong interpersonal relationships--there must be a motivation to give time and skills to make the event a success. Assuming that this motivation is altruistic in nature, or based on personal connection; affinity with the direction of the event and the others involved is key to sustainability. As *Val* points out above, no matter where how experienced or skilled a new organizer is, they will learn the skills to plan a VegFest by jumping in. Fostering strong committees is a bit trickier: Healthy group dynamics are a challenge to establish, as they depend on compatible temperaments and approaches.

Several participants mentioned how important it is for organizers to possess particular personal traits and temperaments in order for the event to be a success. These traits were referenced both members of groups that reported a more hierarchical structure, as well as by organizers who take a horizontal approach. These traits and temperaments are:

* Strong leadership personality
* Assertive and communicative
* Problem solving skills
* Driven and goal oriented
* Dedication and reliability
* Congeniality

The strong leadership qualities favored by *Grey* and *Shay* in the following quotations, are reminiscent of a general approach to event organizing beyond the particularities of a VegFest:

>“It takes a certain personally to do this and every organizer I think will say the same thing: that they don’t have to be well like, [and] at the same time to get things done. And that double part of the personality of being friendly but the same time being bam bam. (strict), it has to go hand in hand because if your personality is too weak. It won't happen.” (Grey Q6.3.4)

>“I have a strong personality. I know because, especially, I think very quickly. I get annoyed if you come to me with a problem without a solution. If you're looking for me to fix the problem, I will fix it but you might not like the way I fix it so… because I'm going to fix it I can think so quickly on my feet, if in thirty seconds you don’t give me a way to fix it. The next three seconds I will saying how it can be done. I'm moving on. and the persons is spinning because I can’t spend, on the day of the event, I don't have fifteen minutes to coddle people. Just do it. My attitude is, “you just need to do it”. I just think if there is a problem I want to fix it. If you do not to tell me how to fix it, I’m going to tell you how to fix it then we're going to move on. Done.” (Grey, Q5.1.1)

>“There's a whole thing about founders.There's a million problems founders potentially have. They can be more narcissistic by nature. They cannot really follow boards at all. There's a billion problems with founders. The beauty of founders is, they're visionary. When they see a wall they believe they're going to bulldoze it, at every single opportunity. That energy is really amazing to deal with and that's why I love dealing with founders.” (Shay, Q5.2)

In the context of a VegFest, these above statements merit closer examination. Everything that is done for a VegFest is within the environment of an animal advocacy movement. The meaning behind qualities of assertiveness and leadership within a social movement are not easily comparable to those outside of it. For instance, when we examine the above quotes, we can pick up on tones of authority. In many cases, leadership is the active expression of authority granted by one’s education, position, status or affiliation with an institution (Weber, 1977). Examples of this could be teachers, religious leaders, CEOs, and so on. In this above instance, the qualities that make a successful organizer are leadership sourced from the particular value system in place within a greater social movement. Leadership in a social movement is granted to those who are strategic ideologues, those who take on a bulk of responsibilities, and who make an impact, among other things.  With this in mind, leadership traits are common to any event organizer, but carry an added meaning for those who are involved in VegFests.

Though not every interview participant would agree with or allow a leader-centric  approach to manifest in their groups, it does explain why this approach can be effective for some, depending on particular group dynamics. As mentioned previously, core compatibility is crucial,  and the above cases show how affinity can be found through respect for a “visionary”, or the effort they expend upon the project and in extension, the movement. This is especially true if others in the group do not have the ability or means to participate in a VegFest as a horizontal collective, but find that their availability and approach is compatible with a group organized by respected assertive leaders.

>“[The main organizers do not] waste people's time with questions that they don't need to be involved with, when we can just troubleshoot it ourselves. And then things get done faster because if I have to wait for everybody to e-mail me back when I'm trying to make a decision...  Sometimes people don't see it or it takes them a long time just because they are at work...[Y]ou know so our group is so chill and I think we're lucky to have easygoing personalities. They are  just like “OK whatever's best for the cause. I don't care”  but I think if I had hot headed people in my group, working with me It might have presented a bigger challenge possibly.” (Montana, Q6.3.2, 3)

>“I mean if it was something trivial like” what brand of cups should I buy?” you know I just go buy them. but for a large major decision that I thought would be controversial or that I thought some people might want to discuss I actually brought it to the group and we discussed on ASANA or in a meeting and sometimes I put a timeline on it, like I have to make a decision next week Friday so get your thoughts in by then. Then I manage it. Some people didn't have time to look at it and we just went ahead. as s we had more years under our belt we made more and more decisions just the same as whatever we did last year unless we discovered some kind of problem with it.” (Briar, Q6.3)

>“I mean we as an organization I think we've done pretty well for the most part like recruiting a group of volunteers who do not want to argue about everything constantly. We discuss things and haven't had too much trouble coming to an agreement. Often people are like well “here's what I think but I don't care that much”. So what I mean is that to some degree the person with the strongest opinion tends to win, which is often me, because I have strong opinions about everything. Well that's not true. about many things. But if somebody really disagreed with me strongly I don't think we would like assume Channey gets to decide what he wants.” (Channey, Q6.3)

One potential pitfall is that each VegFest must find volunteers and core organizers who are based in the local area. This challenge, but it is also what makes VegFest so powerful--they are movementment building activities. Futhermore, though potential participants may be interested in the event, they might not find a place within the organizing structure. This is an issue that will affect events in a smaller local population disproportionately, but is worth consideration by all organizers as an issue of inclusion and sustainability. We can see from the interviews and from other surveys of VegFests that recruiting volunteers is not usually difficult, especially for one day volunteers for the day of the event. If we return to the notion that it is desirable to find the skills needed to make a VegFest a success from within the movement, it follows that an organizing structure should make efforts to enable and nurture the participation of all people who are enthusiastic about the event and what it represents. The may not be the most efficient way to complete a task, but is a necessary part of growing the skills and resources of a movement. We saw that this principle was put in practice by several groups, where tasks were given to organizers and volunteers according to their specific skill set, as a strategy to keep them engaged, and to maximize and build their particular strengths.

Several organizers reported that congeniality is a crucial part of networking, outreach and communication. Moreover, it is an underrated but exceptionally versatile skill:

>“I have a lot of really good relationships with the founders of nonprofits and a bunch of celebrities. I would always use those relationships to help them because that's one of the things that definitely helps with festivals, bringing in more established name people.” (Shay, Q 1.2)

>“We could always use more time on, possibly, maybe, point them at media and see if we could do a much more intensive media outreach like maybe go in person, do phone calls to every single media contact we could find. So we got somebody on the phone because, arranging media, like doing the thing where we got our cooking instructor on T.V. required…it was a bunch of phone call work and it's great that that happened but it's also very time intensive. And it's not just a limit of numbers, you have to have volunteers willing to do this stuff like, do this outreach. A lot of people don't want to make phone calls. I hate it myself.” (Channey Q11.2)

>“We want people who either have no access to the stuff or have some access to information but haven't had that community. we really want to create that community feel, and that would be our lofty goal I guess.  that if you expose as many people as possible to these issues, that they will be more willing to change, and go back into their communities and talk to their families.” (Darcy, Q4.5)

>“I think if you take your non vegan friends to vegan restaurants, that's one of the best things you can do, and invite them to fun vegan events. That's why I think festivals are hugely valuable. You're getting people to experience not that angry, hostile side of...Protests are adversarial by nature. Festivals are supposed to be fun. I think those are hugely valuable.” (Shay Q2.1)

The principles of accessibility, openness and inclusion are prominent when organizers talk about the outward facing tone of their event, but is not always apparent when describing the expertise required to internally facilitate the event. Just as VegFests go to great lengths to reach out and accommodate attendees, we suggest that organizers regularly revisit how their structure might attract or deter skilled participants, and be flexible to new approaches to “celebrate” the community. From our interviews we found that many organizers reported having exactly these conversations, to their benefit. To initiate a conversation about maximizing the skills and expertise available as a way to build group strength, we encourage organizers to consider the following questions:

* How open is the core group to newcomers, and how do we make this known?
* How can we benefit from leadership qualities without contributing to an unbalanced distribution of responsibilities?

We also recommend that funders and organizers work on building the skills that make VegFests a powerful force in the animal rights movement by asking:

* What skills are we lacking, and can we help those in our close networks learn these skills?

### Money and finances

The financial health of a VegFest is not a sole indicator of success, but does contribute to the success of the event. Overwhelmingly, the goal of these events is altruistic: to reach a non vegan audience, and by doing so, make strides to decrease the suffering of animals. The measure of success, then, is based largely on impact. Certain measures of impact are reducible to financial data, for example we can use donations gathered for a non-profit during the festival as one measure. This facet of VegFest organizing is the focus of this section.

VegFests generate income by sponsorships, vendor fees, donations, fundraising efforts and grants. Most VegFest are free to attend, but some charge an entry fee at the door. Generally, most VegFests simply wanted to break even financially, with income from these select areas, and any extra income was welcome but not anticipated. The topic of grants was of particular interest to this project, for two main reasons. First, we wish to learn how to best apply resources to ensure a VegFest is a success for the practical benefit of grant-makers as well as organizers. Second, the barriers between organizers and available grants are often relatively small but to organizers appear large. When both parties have similar goals, how can this report inform each side how to implement strategies to connect with each other? Securing funding is time consuming. Many require financial documents, demographic surveys or other sophisticated documentation that are either not something a part-time organizer will have, or need to have otherwise. Others have restrictions on when groups are eligible for funding, like the Pollination Project’s seed grants for first year events, for example.

>“(we have a grant from) VegFund, the first one I wrote too. A Well Fed World, they are supporting us again they did last year and I wrote to Pollination Projects but they only do seed grants the first time. we need something different so they said no to us, but if I do something different. I know there is Nalith that I could apply it to but it's expensive and I don't have a profit loss sheet, which I would need. and I don’t have the time to deal with that. It's like a hidden grant program. It's really expensive to be able to apply for one. They want to have more official documents which I would have to pay for an accountant, and there's whole lot of stuff I have to do to make that happen.” (Grey Q8.2.2):

>“We don't do the grant writing thing, only because that's extremely time consuming, my experience of grant writing in the nonprofit field is that they can be very restrictive.  I think it's a lot of bullshit. A lot of times it's exhausting, and takes somebody like dedicated work, and then you get the money and then they're able to dictate terms to you, depending on what type of grant it is.” (Darcy, Q8.2.3)

These barriers affected the organizers willingness and ability to apply for grants. For grants to be attractive, the application process should be designed in such a way that the reward correlates to the effort expended. This is not solely the onus of the funding body, rather, we encourage organizers to incorporate sound financial documentation, and a familiarity with the available funds before making decisions as a group that might disqualify them from accessing needed support. Meanwhile, funders should revisit their qualification policies to ensure that they are not requiring superfluous data or documentation from their applicants that they do not make use of, or that does result in getting funds to where they are most needed.

The issue of finances arose when talking about gathering demographic data. It is done largely as a way to get advertisers and vendors, as it shows them that there is a large amount of potential customers or audience.

>“We do it primarily for the advertising stance on it. so that we could go to vendors next year and say “hey we have a growing festival 3500 people you should come you’ll make a shit load of money” but to me that’s not really really exciting but yeah that's why we do it for social media vendor stuff.” (Darcy Q10.1.1)

Sometimes having a sponsor contribute product as a donation in exchange for publicity is best, as volunteers can give out snacks or small items that may attract attendees, or enhance their overall experience. Money is always welcome, but non-monetary support can be valuable as well. We are interested in learning more about instances of non-monetary support from VegFest vendors and sponsors to enable organizers devise a richer financial strategy if they so wish. Regrettably the issue did not arise often during our interviews, but we feel this would be an area of interest in the future as part of a toolkit for VegFest planning.

Attendance is a key to healthy finances, and one organizer used this partnership with commercial sponsors to compensate attendees for having to pay a fee at the door, by offering a “loot bag” to attendees. Three of the organizers reported asking for an entry fee. The others who did not cited this as a very important part of their approach to organizing, and that is was a key to their success. Having the event be “free” is somewhat controversial among organizers.

When asked directly what the organizers would do with unlimited funds they replied with:

* Get larger name speakers and entertainers to draw a larger crowd
* Hiring skilled professionals within their networks (communications, event coordination)
* Better or bigger venue
* Pay themselves or other organizers who are already involved with the fest.

These insights into how financial concerns are barriers to success should be an indication to funders and organizers about what is deemed desirable but not a priority. We posed this question not to simply forward the answer to funders, but to learn about how funds are used. Each of the above items is a facet of organizing that is an improvement on a current element, making what is there bigger or better. This reveals how the event’s success is less determined by finances, and more by outreach capabilities via user experience, and a skilled and valued organizing team.

### Organization and structure

Each VegFest has a unique internal structure. The responsibilities of those who facilitate the event are distributed among core organizers, volunteers, and occasionally a board of directors. Whether the core organizing structure emerges organically, and formal roles develop as the event matures; or the event is envisioned and implemented with a more strategic plan, there is always a division of tasks within the group. We are interested in knowing how the organizers have come to their current roles, what their internal structure looks like, and what can be learned from the various ways VegFests are organized. By examining this, we hope to illuminate some structural elements that may guide and inform other VegFest organizers.  

Each organizer's personal involvement in a VegFest began in a distinct way. *Franz* and *Darcy* became involved with the [location] VegFest, in partnership with the [organization] to create a culminating event for the long standing event organized previously by a woman named *Sarah*. Similarly, *Briar* took over the role of principal organizer for the VegFest in [location] from a friend who had founded the fest, and shortly after partnered with the [organization]. Likewise, *Montana* became involved with the [location] VegFest through her work at [organization], who took over the fest from two independent local organizers in the event’s second year. For *Shay*, his involvement with animal advocacy work began long before the [location] VegFest, but he came to assume a organizer role by working up from a volunteer coordinator in 2003. In these cases, the path to involvement was facilitated by a relationship with an organization or personal friend, rather than initiated first hand.

*Val* and *Channey's* [location] VegFest was inaugurated in 2012, as new programming for their group [organization], which was started long before in 1998. *Kriska's* group, [organization], began organizing the [location] VegFest after receiving an endowment from a colleague who had passed away. Both of these groups were inspired to organize VegFests as an extension of their work for animal rights.

*Grey* stands out as the organizer who was not previously affiliated with a group or founder. *Grey* manifested the [location] VegFest from scratch, eventually creating a non-profit group as a result of the event. She did associate casually with a local group in the first year, the [animal rescue organization], symbiotically naming them as presenters in exchange for the use of their non-profit status.

What we learned from each of these origin stories, is that though each individual comes to VegFests in their own way, and though they are all managed in their own style, every single interviewee mentioned that their VegFest was started by someone who was inspired by a similar successful event. In some instances, they were further motivated by a critical look at nearby events that they wished to improve upon, but using a similar model.  A standout example of this was the oft-cited [location] VegFest, which apparently motivates organizers on the coast to adopt categorically different approaches to their own events.

We find the role of inspiration by other events fascinating, as this suggests that exposure is a mode by which non-profit groups or independent activists can grow a network of VegFests in their region. Underlying this, however, is that the local environment is recognized beforehand to contain the resources to crystalize the animal advocacy movement into some kind of enhanced form. Prior exposure to a successful event, it seems, may make VegFests a focal point for a local movement in a position to capitalize on momentum.

The pathway from inspiration to implementation is what we are interested in exploring in this section. Once everything is in place, how are decisions made about how to proceed, and why do the organizers feel this is the best way ensure a successful event? When asked about this, we received responses which correlated strongly with the notions of expertise and skills discussed earlier, and the ways that those notions relate to the event’s overall approach.

Meetings between all core organizers tend to increase in frequency as the event approaches. In the meantime, communication is generally done through e-mail and by using Google Docs to share files. Email was preferred simply because it is a common medium of communication. The exception to this is *Briar*, whose VeganFest colleagues use ASANA task management software, with positive results. *Channey* lamented that he would prefer to use a Slack channel, but that it was inconvenient for other organizers who were not using a computer for their day jobs. What is the most accessible and expedient communication are the biggest deciding factors in choosing a communication method. For example, *Darcy* and *Kriska* explain why they use email, for distinct reasons:

>“I don't believe in social media stuff so I don't have any of that shit but so... I'm always pushing for in person meetings. I feel like when we need to have an in- person meeting for 2 or 3 hours it saves dozens of hours of texts and Facebooks and e-mails and confusion...For me it's just e-mail an in-person. Because that’s all I got.“ (Darcy, Q4.6)

>“you can get five times more things done in an e-mail exchange than in about a quarter of the time, than you can in a phone conversation.” (Kriska, Q4.6)

The takeaway message regarding communication methods is that  because the majority of VegFest organizers are involved part time, common and frequent modes of communication are conveniently integrated into their usual activities. E-mail is used for daily operations, while In-person meetings take place as a way to discuss in-depth issues and policies, and to meet with volunteers, exhibitors, and others on the margins of the core group.

Open general assemblies are occasionally called as an even broader gathering where any interested participants can come and meet the volunteers and organizers, and learn about the event and how to take part. In this sense some in-person meetings can also be recruitment events and community consultations.

No matter what the method, decision making power is distributed according to one's level of responsibility for carrying out the event. Naturally, this means that core organizers will make critical final decisions when needed, though often after consulting the group as a whole. When a VegFest is organized so that each person takes on a distinct role, decision making power is granted according to their stakeholder status. The stakeholders are still accountable to the others in the group rather than a single leader. Conversely, smaller decisions with little structural impact are up to the discretion of the organizer for pragmatic reasons.

> “We haven't laid out any sort of explicit rule for how decisions are made, but basically Darcy and I, the critical stuff, we decide on ourselves. Anything that isn't critical, we'll bring up at meetings and get input from people. At meetings, we don't have a formal consensus procedure in place or anything like that. Darcy, [name], and I decided on the date of the VegFest. Yeah. I'd say key structural stuff we'll decide amongst ourselves, things that, if a bunch of people thought it should be done a different way, we might not be able to do it effectively anymore. Ultimately we are the ones putting up all the money, and making sure it [the event] happens and nothing goes disastrously wrong. We still maintain control over the things that need to be in place to guarantee that. For the week's events we open it up to suggestions. A couple of the events that ended up happening during the week were other community member's ideas. We'll ask for people's suggestions for speakers. We also will leave open time if people have questions, or ideas, or things they're passionate about. So far no one has been, "I think we should do this differently," or, "I want to see this happen at VegFest." We haven't had too many people who step forward in that way.” (Franz, Q 6.3)

>“I’m the leader. I’m the main person, I do ninety percent of the work and ninety percent of the decision making, and everybody's totally cool with that because nobody else has the time.” (Kriska, Q6.3)

>“We have two people, myself and Channey who has been the kind of the primary organizers and like to go to people, and then we've got a committee of ten people, each with specific roles of cooking or speakers or exhibitor logistics. So we expect people we have job description of those things that we expect people to do their role, and we check in with the committee with most of the major decisions, but the two of us have kind of steered things, made some of the bigger initial decisions, or last minute decisions. But we also check in with people, and try to make it a collaborative thing.” (Val, Q6.3)

>“Our group as a whole kind of does a consensus approach. where it's not like a formal consensus process, that's the worst because, don’t get me started. Basically the way it works is: anybody who wants to have input can have input, and we try to reach a consensus. If we can’t… It's really hasn't been a big issue. We would probably, I don't know what the mechanism would be, we could vote I guess. Like I said, we’ve never had to do this. If [name], the executive director thought something was really not OK, he potentially could overrule the committee, or, and of course the board has also ultimate authority over the groups. the board can overrule anything although again that's basically never happened…” (Channey, Q6.3)

We found it amusing that the most incidental tasks were the responsibility of the organizers with the most decision making power, a latent outcome of a leadership status. These are things that were framed as having little overall effect in isolation, but the burden of handling them is on primary organizers so as not to impede the flow of communication or progress.

>“if it is something that is a major opinion that we thought maybe should go the whole group, then those would go to everybody, but small or a little day to day things, I've I pretty much made the decision with just me and [name].” (Montana, Q6.3)

>“As a board member, I have pushed to not have board members in on every email about everything, like you know the toilet paper and soap for the port-a-potties. No, that's really valuable and I want to make sure that's done. Have a designated person that deals with that and then you have somebody that checks in to make sure it's done, but I don't think every board member…”  (Shay, Q 4,6)

Between those who make the largest and smallest decisions, are those who are liable for the outcome of a certain area of organizing, whether it is the volunteer coordinator or graphic designer. This is one way that some groups choose to plan their VegFest in a more horizontal fashion, by delegating obligations to autonomous sub-groups.

>“Everyone kind of fell into the thing that they wanted to do, more so. But we decided this year that we kind of… we want to make it almost like,  people are directors of their thing.  So for example we have the volunteer co-ordinator, and that's one person.  And then she also was kind of almost the treasurer, the accountant, the money person.  Then we have our media guy. That's [name], he does the social media.  He contacts media outlets that kind of thing. and then then I was the main organizer and basically that just meant dealing with the vendors which was a big chunk of time.” (Montana, Q6.9)

>“As far as making decisions among the organizers themselves, we usually try to make decisions as a group. in the beginning we decided which areas people want to work on whether that is speakers or exhibitors, volunteer coordination. And then some of those subcommittees have committee leaders and it's sort of their responsibility to get a decision or consensus from their side committee about a certain thing” (Briar, Q6.3)

>“Everybody has a defined role, so like the cooking demo coordinator, speaker coordinator advertising coordinator and what we try to also do is just give that person more like, absent of a really contentious point, we just give that person final say. like if we debate something, and there are not strong opinions, we are like OK. [name], who is the social media person, you decide because you have to do the work. So whatever makes you happiest is fine.” (Channey, Q 6.3)

>“What we found though is that most of the volunteers don't care….most volunteers just, they don't, like, want to know the details of how the mock sausage is made...they just want to kind of like do the thing they want to do whether that's leafleting or helping clean VegFest or whatever...we just give space for people to do what they're motivated to do, and we find ways to motivate them. So the nitty gritty details of what staff positions are and what the board does, and what the executives know.. nobody cares about it except people that are like policy nerds” (Channey, Q10.5)

In these cases, the goal of this arrangement was to lessen the burden on any individual, but also to empower the stakeholder to develop the specialized skills that qualified them for the role in the first place, and to develop a sense of ownership over the outcome of the VegFest. In essence, task division based on specialized skills is itself a form of strengthening the group.

On occasion autonomous decision making was adopted as a result of a negative experience, where the balance between role and responsibility was disrupted. Apparent in the scene Franz describes below, making decisions without taking responsibility burdens others while manipulating power dynamics within meetings. This brief anecdote is noteworthy for organizers, however they are structured. It is a reminder to use discretion when reckoning with input whether voiced during meetings or submitted in a survey. As a general rule, presuming all input is given in good faith confers a culture of transparency and inclusion. When this input is actionable and compatible with the values of the group, everyone benefits from this dialogue. When input is not actionable by the person suggesting it, and not resonant enough to be championed by any stakeholder, it is better to deny the changes on the basis that they are not within the scope of their mission, or possible  given the resources available at that time, rather than fundamentally change the decision making process of the group and alienating the now-responsible stakeholder.

>“Last year we ended up having a lot of problems because we have people who come to meetings and have very strong feelings about how things should be done, but wouldn't actually do any of them. We were stuck trying to implement them potentially and realized that it just doesn't work to give people a say in the actual decision making if they are not really a stakeholder.” (Franz, Q 6.3)

Finding a place for everyone in a structure is challenging for organizers. It requires a clear understanding of how to combine roles and responsibilities. As we proceed to the topic of volunteer work, the following quotes illustrate an area of potential tension - what are the boundaries that define a volunteer, and what can be expected from those in this position? For Shay, if you would like to make decisions as a volunteer, you should take on the role and responsibility of a board member. For Grey, it is unwise to assign crucial tasks to a volunteer as they are not obliged to produce results to a specific standard without compensation.
