---
layout: research2016-template
title: Introduction

---

In 2016 there were more than 81 annual veg food festivals in North America. These events vary significantly in size, with some smaller ones attracting a crowd of around 500 people, and the larger ones bringing out tens of thousands of attendees. In total, these festivals attract well over 300,000 attendees annually. In addition to the people who come out to these events, millions more encounter their posters, flyers, posts on social media, online advertisements, TV news stories, newspaper articles and so on. These grassroots events are becoming one of the primary ways that the general public encounters vegetarianism and veganism. Because of their communication abilities and high attendance, VegFests are quickly becoming the most recognizable public face of veganism. These festivals have spread organically over the past decade, without any central organization or formal coordination. Most are run entirely by volunteers, with a small number of them utilizing limited paid staff. Despite their novel approach and dispersed organization, these events have become a significant part of the modern animal rights movement.

In this research project we examined these festivals and learned about the people who plan them. By conducting in-depth interviews and surveys with organizers, we have been able to create a picture of the state of VegFest organizing in 2016. The research team traveled to a handful of festivals across the country, sat in on organizing meetings, recorded over a hundred hours of interviews, and conducted post-event surveys of attendees and exhibitors at 5 festivals.
In this report you’ll learn a brief history of VegFests. You’ll find out the motivations of a sample of VegFest organizers in North America. Throughout this report there are findings about VegFests in general and also lessons from specific festivals. This analysis all stems from our one-on-one interviews and conversations with organizers, our surveys of attendees and exhibitors, personal research observations of active VegFests.

## A Note on Embracing Our Subjectivity

This research is not impartial. In fact, the findings in this report have very meaningful consequences for the researchers. This is a result of participatory action research where both researchers are actively involved in the subject area that is being studied—both Morgan and Drew are long-time vegans and activists, and Drew is himself an active organizer of the New England VegFest.

This research is closer to engineering than it is to science. We have a clear goal for this inquiry—better veg food festivals. We are not simply looking to understand a complicated system from an objective vantage point, we are trying to find the knobs and the levers that we can play with to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of organizing in our movement. As such, the results and conclusions represented in the report are belong to the researchers from their subjective position.
